# Types of migrations

In an Entity Framework Core migration, you will typically see two classes for each migration: a migration file and its associated designer file.

- The migration file is where you control what should be applied to the database when the migration is run. This file is meant to be edited by developers and contains two important methods: `Up(MigrationBuilder migrationBuilder)` which defines what will happen when the migration is applied, and `Down(MigrationBuilder migrationBuilder)` which defines what will happen if the migration needs to be rolled back.

- The migration's designer file is auto-generated by Entity Framework Core and contains code to build a `ModelSnapshot`. This snapshot represents the state of your database schema immediately after this particular migration is applied. It is used to determine what changes need to be made for subsequent migrations. You should not manually edit this file, as it is regenerated when you add or remove migrations.

Both files are important for working with migrations in Entity Framework Core and depend on each other to provide a complete picture of your database schema.

## The third wheel

There's a third file called `DataContextModelSnapshot.cs`.

- This file represents the latest snapshot of your complete database schema after all migrations have been applied, hence providing the most recent state of your database schema.

- The designer files associated with each migration capture the state of the database schema immediately after that migration was applied.

- `DataContextModelSnapshot.cs` represents the current model of the database after all migrations have been applied. It provides the basis for comparison when you add a new migration.

**All these files are generated and managed by Entity Framework Core, and we should not modify them manually.**